README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# SurveySolutionsAPIv2

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

<div align="justify">

This is the updated version of the [Survey Solutions R API
package](https://docs.mysurvey.solutions/headquarters/api/api-r-package/),
based on the newly released [httr2](https://httr2.r-lib.org/index.html)
package. Most of its features and syntax are the same as in the existing
[SurveySolutionsAPI](https://github.com/michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPI)
package, and therefore it should be easy to integrate it in your
existing workflow, based on the previous package. However as there are
also some new features, as well as some cosmetic changes, we decided to
release this package as a completely new one, such that users who do not
want to switch to the new package or make use of the new features, can
still work with the old package as usual.

Nevertheless a transition to the new package is recommended. New
features in this package are:

- workspace can now be set with *suso_set_key*
- *suso_export* allows to merge all the data export files into one
- Spatial data (i.e. polygons, point locations, lines) can be processed
  into sf objects
- For potentially long running jobs, like assignment creation, httr2’s
  parallel request feature is used
- and many more.

It allows you to export data/paradata collected through CAWI, CATI or
CAPI operations, manipulate users and questionnaires, create
assignments, get information about the survey progress etc.. All
directly out of R.

However it is more than just a simple wrapper around the Survey
Solutions REST API, which one can easily address through using i.e. the
excellent httr package which also constitutes the basis for this
package. The main intention of this package though, is to be integrated
into your own data collection workflow, either through a shiny
application or just through a simple script. This allows you to build
your own workflows with your own customized user interfaces for your
Survey Solutions data collection operations, no matter if you are
dealing with a small scale impact evaluation or a large scale census.
For this reason, the API calls return easy to process data tables, and
in some cases, like paradata, even add additional variables useful for
further processing.

Important to note here is, that the package also makes extensive use of
the **data.table** package, which allows for fast (multi-core)
processing of large data sets. The individual functions either return a
data.table, or a specific S3 extension of data.table, with individual
methods defined. In case you are not familiar with it yet, you should
probably have a look a this
[introduction](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/data.table/vignettes/datatable-intro.html).

Nevertheless, in case you don’t require the capacities offered by
data.table, you can still treat the return objects like a data frame or
even continue with it in the tidyverse. A package which combines both
worlds is the [dtplyr](https://github.com/tidyverse/dtplyr) package, and
for a comparison between the dplyr package and the data.table package
see [here](https://atrebas.github.io/post/2019-03-03-datatable-dplyr/).

Specific changes in version 0.6.X:

- Preparation for token authentication (not active yet)
- Map handling and management: suso_mapupload(), suso_mapassign(),
  suso_mapinfo()
- Introduction of S3 classes for return values, such that all
  information returned from the API can be used efficiently. See news
  for further details and classes.

## Installation

The package is not on CRAN yet, so you have to install it by using

``` r

devtools::install_github("michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPIv2", build_vignettes = T)
```

The included vignettes also contain different examples and further
explanations. Bellow you can find a few examples.

## Examples

### Credentials Management

To use the API you first need to set-up the API user on your Survey
Solutions server. See
[here](https://support.mysurvey.solutions/headquarters/api/) for
details. After this done, you can use the *suso_set_key()* function, to
provide your credentials.

``` r
library(SurveySolutionsAPIv2)
suso_clear_keys()
suso_set_key("https://xxx.mysurvey.solutions", "xxxxxx", "xxxxxxx")
suso_keys()
#> $suso
#> $suso$susoServer
#> [1] "https://xxx.mysurvey.solutions"
#> 
#> $suso$susoUser
#> [1] "xxxxxx"
#> 
#> $suso$susoPass
#> [1] "xxxxxxx"
#> 
#> 
#> attr(,"class")
#> [1] "suso_api"
```

### Workspace Management

You can also manage your workspaces through the API. In particular, you
can

- request a list of all workspaces the API user has access to, as well
  as
- create new workspaces
- and assign users to a particular workspace.

However for the latter two operations you require ADMIN credentials.
Standard API user credentials would not work.

To receive a list of workspaces to which the current API user has access
to, you can just run:

``` r
ws <- suso_getWorkspace()
print(head(ws))
#>       Name       DisplayName DisabledAtUtc
#> 1: primary Default Workspace            NA
#> 2:    test              test            NA
#> 3:   test2             test2            NA
```

### User Management

These functions are particularly useful for survey management, and more
details can be found in the corresponding vignette on survey management.
Lets start with getting a list of all supervisors on the server.

``` r
sv <- suso_getSV(workspace = "test")
print(head(sv))
#>    IsLocked        CreationDate                               UserId   UserName
#> 1:    FALSE 2023-02-07 17:33:40 00d21677-0331-4698-ae7b-908aeac14dd6 somesvuser
#> 2:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:05:10 ded27a4a-716d-4bf2-8d54-aedc31fc164b     SV0001
#> 3:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 5753ddde-3c7d-438f-9934-43fdf18fa802     SV0002
#> 4:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 72196c84-8f2f-488a-8d61-f23b8b998d43     SV0003
#> 5:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 1a9d4b10-c92d-401d-af69-2a7d0a391fe6     SV0004
#> 6:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 97e9e4ff-22e1-492f-a102-03c2115903e7     SV0005
```

### Questionnaire Management

The basic questionnaire API calls are handled through the
*suso_getQuestDetails* function.

If no input is provided, the function returns a list of all
questionnaires on the server:

``` r
questlist <- suso_getQuestDetails(workspace = "test")
# print(questlist)
```

Specifying *operation.type = status*, you receive a list of statuses.

``` r
statlist <- suso_getQuestDetails(operation.type = "statuses", workspace = "test")
print(statlist)
#>  [1] "Restored"               "Created"                "SupervisorAssigned"     "InterviewerAssigned"    "RejectedBySupervisor"   "ReadyForInterview"      "SentToCapi"            
#>  [8] "Restarted"              "Completed"              "ApprovedBySupervisor"   "RejectedByHeadquarters" "ApprovedByHeadquarters" "Deleted"
```

By taking a particular *QuestionnaireId* and specifying the
*operation.type *you can execute further requests. For example,

### Data Export

To export the data collected in Survey Solutions, you use *suso_export*.

    #> The last file has been created 0.06833 hours ago.
    #> FileName: assignment__actions 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: households 
    #> Nesting Level: 1 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__actions 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__diagnostics 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__errors 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****

Its return value is a list with the following elements: main, R1, R2,
R3, with

- **main** containing the files: interview\_\_comments, kasai_listing1
- **R1** containing all rosters at the first level
- **R2** containing all rosters at the second level
- **R3** containing all rosters at the third level

through the harmonized ID, main and roster files can easily be put
together. More on this in the specific vignette.

## Paradata Export

To retrieve the paradata for a particular interview you use
*suso_export_paradata*

``` r
system.time(para1 <- suso_export_paradata(questID = questlist[1, QuestionnaireId], workspace = "test", version = questlist[1, Version], reloadTimeDiff = 24, onlyActiveEvents = F, allResponses = T))
#> 
#> The last file has been created 1 hours ago.
#> 
#> Starting download & file extraction. 
#> 
#> 
#> Calculating Response Timings.
#> 
#> Extracting GPS variable.
#> Processing: 
#>  AnswerSet
#> 
#>  AnswerRemoved
#> 
#>  ApproveByHeadquarter
#> 
#>  Restarted
#> 
#>  Reject
#> 
#>  QuestionDeclaredInvalid
#> 
#>  QuestionDeclaredValid
#> 
#> Export & Transformation finished.
#>    user  system elapsed 
#>   0.536   0.036   0.820
```

### Map management

Since recently, it is now also possible, to handle maps through the API.
This is implemented through the lately introduced GraphQL API.

To upload a map, you can just use the **suso_mapupload** function like
this:

``` r
suso_mapupload(workspace = "test", path_to_zip = mapPath)
#>    xMaxVal yMaxVal xMinVal yMinVal wkid             fileName  size maxScale minScale shapeType       importDateUtc                           uploadedBy     users
#> 1:  -78.39    26.8  -78.62   26.55 4326 checkshapesimple.shp 20467        0        0   Polygon 2023-02-16 17:24:47 961d073f-f316-4353-9e7e-1f00899cb837 <list[0]>
```

To assign a map you can use the **suso_mapassign** function:

``` r
suso_mapassign(workspace = "test", fileName = "checkshapesimple.shp", userName = "INT0004")
#>                fileName    user shapeType       importDateUtc
#> 1: checkshapesimple.shp INT0004   Polygon 2023-02-16 17:24:47
```

## Further information

To find information on the World Bank’s Survey Solutions CASS have a
look on these pages:

- Survey Solutions Support Page: <https://support.mysurvey.solutions/>

- Survey Solutions Server request: <https://mysurvey.solutions/>

To find information on the API syntax, visit your own servers API
documentation or got to:

- <https://demo.mysurvey.solutions/primary/apidocs/index.html#>

And to find more information on the package, check out the package
vignettes.

## Feature requests and bug reports

You can either use the standard GitHub approach by filing a bug
report/feature request
[here](https://github.com/michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPIv2/issues) or you
use the Survey Solutions user forum
[here](https://forum.mysurvey.solutions/c/api/13).

</div>

Commit message:

updated error handler for exports

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# SurveySolutionsAPIv2

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

<div align="justify">

This is a new edition of the [Survey Solutions R API
package](https://docs.mysurvey.solutions/headquarters/api/api-r-package/),
based on the newly released [httr2](https://httr2.r-lib.org/index.html)
package. Most of the syntax are the same as in the existing httr based
[SurveySolutionsAPI](https://github.com/michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPI)
package, and therefore it should be easy to integrate it in your
existing workflow, if you used the previous edition.

Nevertheless, there are several other updates like more meaningful error
messages and other cosmetic changes and there are also quite a bunch of
new features. Therefore i decided to release this package as a
completely new one, such that users who do not want to switch to the new
package or make use of the new features, can still work with the old
package as usual.

Nevertheless a transition to the new package is recommended. New
features in this package are:

- workspace can now be set with *suso_set_key*
- *suso_export* allows to merge all the data export files into one
- Spatial data (i.e. polygons, point locations, lines) can be processed
  into sf objects
- For potentially long running jobs, like assignment creation, httr2’s
  parallel request feature is used
- available value labels are applied to categorical variables, and even
  translation can be added.
- and many more.

It allows you to export data/paradata collected through CAWI, CATI or
CAPI operations, manipulate users and questionnaires, create
assignments, get information about the survey progress etc.. All
directly out of R.

However it is more than just a simple wrapper around the Survey
Solutions REST API, which one can easily address through using i.e. the
excellent httr package which also constitutes the basis for this
package. The main intention of this package though, is to be integrated
into your own data collection workflow, either through a shiny
application or just through a simple script. This allows you to build
your own workflows with your own customized user interfaces for your
Survey Solutions data collection operations, no matter if you are
dealing with a small scale impact evaluation or a large scale census.
For this reason, the API calls return easy to process data tables, and
in some cases, like paradata, even add additional variables useful for
further processing.

Important to note here is, that the package also makes extensive use of
the **data.table** package, which allows for fast (multi-core)
processing of large data sets. The individual functions either return a
data.table, or a specific S3 extension of data.table, with individual
methods defined. In case you are not familiar with it yet, you should
probably have a look a this
[introduction](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/data.table/vignettes/datatable-intro.html).

Nevertheless, in case you don’t require the capacities offered by
data.table, you can still treat the return objects like a data frame or
even continue with it in the tidyverse. A package which combines both
worlds is the [dtplyr](https://github.com/tidyverse/dtplyr) package, and
for a comparison between the dplyr package and the data.table package
see [here](https://atrebas.github.io/post/2019-03-03-datatable-dplyr/).

Specific changes in version 0.6.X:

- Preparation for token authentication (not active yet)
- Map handling and management: suso_mapupload(), suso_mapassign(),
  suso_mapinfo()
- Introduction of S3 classes for return values, such that all
  information returned from the API can be used efficiently. See news
  for further details and classes.

## Installation

The package is not on CRAN yet, so you have to install it by using

``` r

devtools::install_github("michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPIv2", build_vignettes = T)
```

The included vignettes also contain different examples and further
explanations. Bellow you can find a few examples.

## Examples

### Credentials Management

To use the API you first need to set-up the API user on your Survey
Solutions server. See
[here](https://support.mysurvey.solutions/headquarters/api/) for
details. After this done, you can use the *suso_set_key()* function, to
provide your credentials.

``` r
library(SurveySolutionsAPIv2)
suso_clear_keys()
suso_set_key("https://xxx.mysurvey.solutions", "xxxxxx", "xxxxxxx")
suso_keys()
#> $suso
#> $suso$susoServer
#> [1] "https://xxx.mysurvey.solutions"
#> 
#> $suso$susoUser
#> [1] "xxxxxx"
#> 
#> $suso$susoPass
#> [1] "xxxxxxx"
#> 
#> 
#> attr(,"class")
#> [1] "suso_api"
```

### Workspace Management

You can also manage your workspaces through the API. In particular, you
can

- request a list of all workspaces the API user has access to, as well
  as
- create new workspaces
- and assign users to a particular workspace.

However for the latter two operations you require ADMIN credentials.
Standard API user credentials would not work.

To receive a list of workspaces to which the current API user has access
to, you can just run:

``` r
ws <- suso_getWorkspace()
print(head(ws))
#>       Name       DisplayName DisabledAtUtc
#> 1: primary Default Workspace            NA
#> 2:    test              test            NA
#> 3:   test2             test2            NA
```

### User Management

These functions are particularly useful for survey management, and more
details can be found in the corresponding vignette on survey management.
Lets start with getting a list of all supervisors on the server.

``` r
sv <- suso_getSV(workspace = "test")
print(head(sv))
#>    IsLocked        CreationDate                               UserId   UserName
#> 1:    FALSE 2023-02-07 17:33:40 00d21677-0331-4698-ae7b-908aeac14dd6 somesvuser
#> 2:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:05:10 ded27a4a-716d-4bf2-8d54-aedc31fc164b     SV0001
#> 3:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 5753ddde-3c7d-438f-9934-43fdf18fa802     SV0002
#> 4:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 72196c84-8f2f-488a-8d61-f23b8b998d43     SV0003
#> 5:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 1a9d4b10-c92d-401d-af69-2a7d0a391fe6     SV0004
#> 6:    FALSE 2023-02-04 19:36:03 97e9e4ff-22e1-492f-a102-03c2115903e7     SV0005
```

### Questionnaire Management

The basic questionnaire API calls are handled through the
*suso_getQuestDetails* function.

If no input is provided, the function returns a list of all
questionnaires on the server:

``` r
questlist <- suso_getQuestDetails(workspace = "test")
# print(questlist)
```

Specifying *operation.type = status*, you receive a list of statuses.

``` r
statlist <- suso_getQuestDetails(operation.type = "statuses", workspace = "test")
print(statlist)
#>  [1] "Restored"               "Created"                "SupervisorAssigned"     "InterviewerAssigned"    "RejectedBySupervisor"   "ReadyForInterview"      "SentToCapi"            
#>  [8] "Restarted"              "Completed"              "ApprovedBySupervisor"   "RejectedByHeadquarters" "ApprovedByHeadquarters" "Deleted"
```

By taking a particular *QuestionnaireId* and specifying the
*operation.type *you can execute further requests. For example,

### Data Export

To export the data collected in Survey Solutions, you use *suso_export*.

    #> The last file has been created 0.06833 hours ago.
    #> FileName: assignment__actions 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: households 
    #> Nesting Level: 1 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__actions 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__diagnostics 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****
    #> 
    #> FileName: interview__errors 
    #> Nesting Level: 0 
    #> ****

Its return value is a list with the following elements: main, R1, R2,
R3, with

- **main** containing the files: interview\_\_comments, kasai_listing1
- **R1** containing all rosters at the first level
- **R2** containing all rosters at the second level
- **R3** containing all rosters at the third level

through the harmonized ID, main and roster files can easily be put
together. More on this in the specific vignette.

## Paradata Export

To retrieve the paradata for a particular interview you use
*suso_export_paradata*

``` r
system.time(para1 <- suso_export_paradata(questID = questlist[1, QuestionnaireId], workspace = "test", version = questlist[1, Version], reloadTimeDiff = 24, onlyActiveEvents = F, allResponses = T))
#> 
#> The last file has been created 1 hours ago.
#> 
#> Starting download & file extraction. 
#> 
#> 
#> Calculating Response Timings.
#> 
#> Extracting GPS variable.
#> Processing: 
#>  AnswerSet
#> 
#>  AnswerRemoved
#> 
#>  ApproveByHeadquarter
#> 
#>  Restarted
#> 
#>  Reject
#> 
#>  QuestionDeclaredInvalid
#> 
#>  QuestionDeclaredValid
#> 
#> Export & Transformation finished.
#>    user  system elapsed 
#>   0.536   0.036   0.820
```

### Map management

Since recently, it is now also possible, to handle maps through the API.
This is implemented through the lately introduced GraphQL API.

To upload a map, you can just use the **suso_mapupload** function like
this:

``` r
suso_mapupload(workspace = "test", path_to_zip = mapPath)
#>    xMaxVal yMaxVal xMinVal yMinVal wkid             fileName  size maxScale minScale shapeType       importDateUtc                           uploadedBy     users
#> 1:  -78.39    26.8  -78.62   26.55 4326 checkshapesimple.shp 20467        0        0   Polygon 2023-02-16 17:24:47 961d073f-f316-4353-9e7e-1f00899cb837 <list[0]>
```

To assign a map you can use the **suso_mapassign** function:

``` r
suso_mapassign(workspace = "test", fileName = "checkshapesimple.shp", userName = "INT0004")
#>                fileName    user shapeType       importDateUtc
#> 1: checkshapesimple.shp INT0004   Polygon 2023-02-16 17:24:47
```

## Further information

To find information on the World Bank’s Survey Solutions CASS have a
look on these pages:

- Survey Solutions Support Page: <https://support.mysurvey.solutions/>

- Survey Solutions Server request: <https://mysurvey.solutions/>

To find information on the API syntax, visit your own servers API
documentation or got to:

- <https://demo.mysurvey.solutions/primary/apidocs/index.html#>

And to find more information on the package, check out the package
vignettes.

## Feature requests and bug reports

You can either use the standard GitHub approach by filing a bug
report/feature request
[here](https://github.com/michael-cw/SurveySolutionsAPIv2/issues) or you
use the Survey Solutions user forum
[here](https://forum.mysurvey.solutions/c/api/13).

</div>
